docs: design doc for node loss (#12253)
rook/rook: design/ceph/node-loss-rbd-cephfs.md

> # Recover RBD RWO/Cephfs in case of Node Loss

Reviewer: Recover RBD/CephFS RWO PVC in case of Node Loss

## Goal

> Faster RBD RWO/Cephfs recovery in case of node loss.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Faster RBD/CephFS RWO recovery in case of node loss.
```

## Problem

For RBD RWO recovery:

When a node is lost where a pod is running with the RBD RWO volume is mounted, the volume cannot automatically be mounted on another node. If two clients are write to the same volume it could cause corruption. The node must be guaranteed to be down before the volume can be mounted on another node.

> For Cephfs recovery:

Reviewer: instead of cephfs use `CephFS` wherever possible

> With the current design the node recovery will faster for CephFS.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the current design the node recovery will be faster for CephFS.
```

## Current Solution

For RBD RWO recovery:

> We have a manual solution to the problem which involves forceful deletion of a pod so that forced detachment and attachment work is possible. The problem with the current solution is that even after the forced pod deletion it takes around 11 minutes for the volume to mount on the new node. Also there are still chances of data corruption if the old pod on the lost node comes back online, causing multiple writers and lead to data corruption. There is a another [documentation](../../Documentation/Troubleshooting/ceph-csi-common-issues.md#node-loss) which avoid data corruption which is baiscally if manual process of blocklisting NodeIPs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We have a manual solution to the problem which involves forceful deletion of a pod so that forced detachment and attachment work is possible. The problem with the current solution is that even after the forced pod deletion it takes around 11 minutes for the volume to mount on the new node. Also there are still chances of data corruption if the old pod on the lost node comes back online, causing multiple writers and lead to data corruption if the [documentation](../../Documentation/Troubleshooting/ceph-csi-common-issues.md#node-loss) is not followed to  manually block nodes.
```

Reviewer 2: We may want to have a URL specifically to the 1.11 docs here since this doc will likely change with the new solution.

Author: added link for 1.11

For CephFS recovery:

Currently, CephFS recovery is slower in case of node loss.

## Proposed Solution

> Note: This solution requires minimum kubernetes version 1.26.0

The kubernetes feature [Non-Graceful Node Shutdown](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2022/12/16/kubernetes-1-26-non-graceful-node-shutdown-beta/) is available starting in Kubernetes 1.26 to help improve the volume recovery during node loss. When a node is lost, the admin is required to add the taint `out-of-service` manually to the node. After the node is tainted, Kubernetes will:

- Remove the volume attachment from the lost node
- Delete the old pod on the lost node
- Create a new pod on the new node
- Allow the volume to be attached to the new node

Once this taint is applied manually, Rook will create a [NetworkFence CR](https://github.com/csi-addons/kubernetes-csi-addons/blob/main/docs/networkfence.md). The [csi-addons operator](https://github.com/csi-addons/kubernetes-csi-addons) will then blocklist the node to prevent any ceph rbd/CephFS client on the lost node from writing any more data.

> After the new pod is running on the new node and the old node which was lost comes back, Rook will delete the [NetworkFencr CR](https://github.com/csi-addons/kubernetes-csi-addons/blob/main/docs/networkfence.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After the new pod is running on the new node and the old node which was lost comes back, Rook will delete the [NetworkFence CR](https://github.com/csi-addons/kubernetes-csi-addons/blob/main/docs/networkfence.md).
```

example of taint to be applied to lost node:

```console
kubectl taint nodes <node-name> node.kubernetes.io/out-of-service=nodeshutdown:NoExecute
# or
kubectl taint nodes <node-name> node.kubernetes.io/out-of-service=nodeshutdown:NoSchedule
```

> > Note: This will be enabled by default in Rook if the NetworkFence CR is found, in the case for some reason user wants to disable this feature in Rook can edit `Rook-ceph-operator-config` configmap and update the `Rook_WATCH_FOR_NODE_FAILURE: "false"`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Note: This will be enabled by default in Rook if the NetworkFence CR is found, in the case for some reason user wants to disable this feature in Rook can edit the `rook-ceph-operator-config` configmap and update the `ROOK_WATCH_FOR_NODE_FAILURE: "false"`.
```

## How to get which IP to blocklist

There are multiple networking options available for example, Host Networking, Pod networking, Multus etc. This make it difficult to know which NodeIP address to blocklist.

> For this we'll follow the following approach which will work for all networking options(but still will not work for external cluster which NodeIPs):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this we'll follow the following approach which will work for all networking options, except when connected to an external Ceph cluster.
```

1. Get the `volumesInUse` from the node which has the taint `out-of-service`.

2. List all the pv and compare the pv `spec.volumeHandle` with the node `volumesInUse` field `volumeHandle`
   1. Example:

      Below is sample Node volumeInUse field

    ```
      volumesInUse:

>         - kubernetes.io/csi/Rook-ceph.rbd.csi.ceph.com^0001-0009-Rook-ceph-0000000000000002-24862838-240d-4215-9183-abfc0e9e4002

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kubernetes.io/csi/rook-ceph.rbd.csi.ceph.com^0001-0009-Rook-ceph-0000000000000002-24862838-240d-4215-9183-abfc0e9e4002`
```

Author: why  '`' in the end?

Reviewer: thats not required, we can discard it. i missed adding ``` at start when adding the comment

      # Note: The volumeInUse naming convention are `kubernetes.io/csi/ + CSI driver name + ^ + volumeHandle`
    ```

     and the following is pv `volumeInHandle`

     ```
      volumeHandle: 0001-0009-Rook-ceph-0000000000000002-24862838-240d-4215-9183-abfc0e9e4002
    ```

3. For Ceph volumes on that node:

   1. If RBD PVC makes use of the rbd status API
      1. example:

    ```console
    $ rbd status <poolname>/<image_name>
    Watchers:
    watcher=172.21.12.201:0/4225036114 client.17881 cookie=18446462598732840961
    ```

>    2. If CephFS PVC uses below CLI to client clients connect to subvolume

Reviewer: `If CephFS PVC uses below CLI to list clients connect to subvolume`

      1. example:

      ```console

>       $ ceph tell mds.0 client ls

Reviewer 2: This needs to be called for each mds daemon, right? And it could be a long list of clients to compare if a large cluster? This seems fine since it's a rare operation, just wanted to confirm.

Reviewer: i think we need to call this with one of the active mds.

Author: we can use `ceph tell mds.* client ls` to run for all the daemon.

Yes, it is a large set of outputs. I will like to do something in go-ceph so that we can get these details. But it will time for me to understand and all, meantime I'll start with running the command only .

Reviewer: >Yes, it is a large set of outputs. I will like to do something in go-ceph so that we can get these details. But it will time for me to understand and all, meantime I'll start with running the command only .

I would suggest using CLI here (if we don't have an API in go-ceph yet), You will not get much benefit using go-ceph, this is a rare one-time operation when the node goes down and is required only if no rbd PVC but cephfs PVC is mounted on the node.

      ...
      ...
      ...
       "addr": {
                "type": "v1",
                "addr": "192.168.39.214:0",
                "nonce": 1301050887
       }
      ...
      ...
      ...
       ```

4. Get IPs from step 3 (in above example `172.21.12.201:0/4225036114`)

> 5. blocklist the endpoint where the volumes are mounted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. blocklist the IP where the volumes are mounted.
```

Suggested change
Example of a NetworkFence CR that the Rook operator would create when a `node.kubernetes.io/out-of-service` taint is added on the node:

```yaml
apiVersion: csiaddons.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: NetworkFence
metadata:
  name: <name> # We will keep the name the same as the node name
  namespace: <ceph-cluster-namespace>
spec:

>   driver: <driver-name> # for us it will `Rook-ceph.rbd.csi.ceph.com` or `Rook-ceph.cephfs.csi.ceph.com`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  driver: <driver-name> #  extract the driver name from the PV object.
```
>for us it will `Rook-ceph.rbd.csi.ceph.com` or `Rook-ceph.cephfs.csi.ceph.com`

This will change based on the namespace where rook operator is running.

  fenceState: <fence-state> # For us it will be `Fenced`
  cidrs:

>     - <172.21.12.201:0> # from above section, how to get node ip to block

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - 172.21.12.201
```
